History of Typography

Gothic/Blackletter

When Gutenburg invented the printing press in 1440, he wanted to
mass-produce the hand-drawn caligraphy of monks. It’s hard to read if
you’re not a medieval scholar, so don’t use it unless you’re really
trying to recreate the middle ages.

Old Style Serif

Old style fonts were the first “modern” fonts. They’re soft, warm, and
still almost feel hand-drawn. They’re built for legibility, which make
them fantastic text fonts. Use them when you want to evoke the
Renaissance.

Transitional Serif

Make old-style fonts less hand-drawn and chop the serifs off at right
angles, and you get transitional fonts. This was the predominant font
during the founding of the United States and has strong connotations
with neoclassical architecture and art.

Didot Serif

Didot fonts create a stark contrast between thick vertical strokes and
very thin horizontal ones. They have an air of elegance about them,
which is why they’re popular fonts for luxury brands and fasion
magazines. Not so great as text fonts though.

Slab Serif

Take a Didot font, make all the strokes the same width, and you get a
slab serif. They’re a font created during the industrial revolution,
primarly for titles, not for long runs of text.

Fat Face Serif

The industrial revolution brought about a need to advertise the
resulting surplus of goods. Making slab serifs fonts really thick was
a good way to stand out. You’ll also recognize fat face serifs in
want-ads from the Westward Expansion in the United States.

Grotesque Sans Serif

Slab serif fonts without the serifs don’t have much character, but
that makes them really versatile, right? Max Miedinger certainly
thought so when he invented Helvetica in 1957.

Geometric Sans Serif

Apply Bauhaus design aesthetics to typography, and you get geometric
sans serif fonts. They’re like Grotesque fonts, but have rounder
forms. They’re a classically modern font for the 1940s and 50s, but
they’re hard to read, making them less suitable as text fonts.

Humanist Sans Serif

Geometric sans serif fonts lost their human character, so why not add
a little hint of old-style serif into a sans serif font? You get a
modern font that’s easy-to-read and has enough character to stand on
its own as a display font.

Display

Now that we have web fonts, the sky’s the limit with how fancy we can
get with our fonts. The last decade has seen an explosion in fancy
font faces, many of which are best-suited for titles. These are great
for adding unique character to a website’s headings.

Monospace

Monospace fonts are a fluke of history. They were designed
specifically for the technical limitations of typewriters, ignoring
many of the typographic principles that make for legible text. Don’t
use them unless you’re marking up code snippets.